Ultimate Body Building Nutrition
Study Guide
&
Ultimate Body Building Guide

Copyright ©2010 International Association
of Fitness Sciences. All rights reserved. No
part of this work may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic
or
mechanical,
including
photocopying and recording, or by any
information storage or retrieval system,
except as may be expressly permitted by 1976
Copyright Act or in writing by the Publisher.

Ultimate Body Building
Nutrition Study Guide &
Ultimate Body Building Guide

Table of Contents

Ultimate Body Building Nutritional Guide ............................................ 1
Calorie Guide ......................................................................................... 6
The Three Body Types ........................................................................... 9
Vitamin Supplements ........................................................................... 11
Definition and Weight Distribution ..................................................... 14
Pre-contest Carbohydrate Loading and Depletion ............................... 16
Ultimate Body Building Training Guide ............................................. 19
Training Systems ................................................................................. 21
Anatomy Chart ..................................................................................... 27
Training Principles ............................................................................... 30
Weight Training Exercises and Function ............................................. 32
The Art of Posing ................................................................................. 37
Sportsmanship ...................................................................................... 39
Safety Checklist ................................................................................... 40
Warning................................................................................................ 42

Ultimate Body Building Nutritional Guide
The following information will help you establish a good
foundation concerning the function of the basic food groups: protein,
carbohydrates, and fats. This will give you a better understanding of the
individual purpose of each of them and the role they play in building a
strong body. I will also discuss the use of vitamin supplements, various
herbs and sports supplements.
Protein: Protein is important for building and maintaining quality
muscle tissue. Known as the building blocks for the body, protein is
necessary in repairing cell and tissue and a must, when it comes to
packing on muscle mass. There are several different forms of protein
when putting together a good nutritional program. It may consist of
chicken, fish, eggs, dairy, vegetable sources, and protein supplements.
Having a variety of the protein sources mention will give you what is
needed for a strong and healthy body. The following is my top
recommendations:
Salmon (wild Alaskan): High in omega oil
Sea Bass: High in omega oil
Mackerel: High in omega oil
Halibut, Cod, Grouper, Tilapia, Flounder, Sword, Snapper, Trout,
Chicken (raised with no hormones or anti-biotic)
Eggs: (raised on natural vegetable sources with no hormones or antibiotic)
Cottage cheese (use low sodium)
Beans: (Crowder peas, field peas, navy beans, red beans, pinto beans,
black beans, butter beans) Offers a great source of protein that include
carbohydrates for energy, and fiber for fighting cholesterol
Notice, fish was at the top of the list. It is one of few protein
sources not tainted with hormones and antibiotics. Besides, I like the
nutritional examples that Jesus used in making fish his number 1 protein
source when eating with his disciples. Apparently, he knew something
about quality nutrition.
Now, here comes the hard question... how much protein should
you consumed per serving?

1

In my professional on the job training experience, I recommend
no more that 25-30 grams per serving for the average person; however,
for those of us who lift big weights and looking for mass 40-50 grams is
better. Taking in quantities larger than that is more than the body need in
one serving. Keeping in mind that the main function of protein is to build
muscle and repair cells.
Carbohydrates: Carbohydrates are important when it comes to fueling
the body. They are a key component when it comes to loosing or gaining
weight. The amount of carbohydrates needed for daily caloric intake
may vary depending upon the need of the individual.
For instance, someone that has a physically demanding job will
need more carbohydrates than someone who does not. When I competed
for the Mr. Olympia competitions, I would consume 500 to 600 grams of
carbohydrates a day. Now, in my fifty's, I consume less than half that
amount.
When it comes to hard-core training 200-300 gram of
carbohydrates or more may be needed. Your energy level during the day
is a very good indicator as to what your body may need. If you lack
energy, it is possible your carbohydrate intake could be too low;
however, you must also take in account how much sleep you are getting
and when was the last time you detoxed your body. Either could cause a
loss in energy that will further increase the craving for more
carbohydrates. The fewer carbohydrates needed to power your day the
easier it will be to burn body fat. However, if the goal is to put on size,
increased carbohydrates are key.
Then, there is the type of carbohydrates. This is important to
know because some of them burn slowly in the body while others burn
fast. Complex carbohydrates are slow burning. They consist of foods
like pasta, rice, grains, corn, and potatoes. If the goal is to put on muscle
and keep the energy level high, complex carbohydrates are key.
However, when the goal is to lose weight, we must limit these types of
carbohydrates.

2

As a word of caution, be conscious of high calorie and
caffeinated beverages such as sodas and so call energy drinks. The
majority of them are loaded with carbohydrates that can cause unwanted
weight gain and a false energy supply. Energy should be available
because of proper rest and quality nutrition. Read labels before buying.
The best choice of carbohydrates for those that are not so
physically challenge in the gym or work place is fruit. It tastes great and
burns fast while offering fiber that help fight cholesterol. Here is my top
list:
Pears (eat with skin) loaded with fiber
Apples (eat with skin)
Pineapple (excellent source of fiber and digestive enzymes)
Papaya (excellent source of fiber and taste great while also offering
digestive enzymes)
Blueberries and Blackberries (the perfect anti-oxidants for cellular
health)
Straw berries (anti-oxidants)
Oranges (source of vitamin C to boost immune system)
Melon family (water melon and cantaloupe are great low calorie feel
good snacks)
This of course, is a limited list of good tasting carbohydrates. Feel free
to incorporate those best suited for your taste buds.
As a side note, I included apples, pineapple, pears, and bananas
when training for competitions. I mentioned this because there's many a
number of misinformed bodybuilding experts that believe the natural
sugar found in fruit will prevent maximum muscle definition.
This may be true if you allow your off season body weight to
bloom past 30-40lb over competition weight. "Can't flex it, don't carry
it."
Then we have the high fiber low calorie leafy carbohydrates that
make a word of difference in our total physical well-being. If not for
these bountiful treasures, toxins would reap havoc throughout our entire
body.

3

Over the past few years bodybuilding has lost several world
renown champions to heart disease. This may be partly due to the use of
high protein red meat diets that bodybuilders so often use. By having a
balance diet that is high in fiber, it will help keep our hearts strong and
healthy.
The following is a list of these awesome age managing veggies:
Collard greens
Cabbage
Turnip greens
Squash
Spinach

Kale
Celery
Broccoli
Green beans
Green peas

Okra
Lettuce
Tomatoes
Asparagus
Cauliflower

Fat: Fat plays an important role in our overall health, just as protein and
carbohydrates. There are two types of fats that we should be aware of,
saturated and unsaturated. Saturated fats come from animal sources,
which can raise bad cholesterol levels. Unsaturated fats come from plant
sources, known to fight bad cholesterol. Another beneficial source of fat
is in fish oils. Also known as omega-3; fish oil is used to reduce blood
pressure, fight arthritis, lower cholesterol, and other health ailments.
When choosing the best sources of fat for my diet I prefer using
combinations of nuts and oils high in essential fatty acids. As for nuts,
Walnuts are at the top of my list. They taste great, easy to fine, and add
texture to my oatmeal. If that is not enough, Walnuts offer support for
cardio-vascular health.
Then, there are Brazil Nuts. They make an excellent snack
between meals. One of the biggest benefits of this particular nut is that it
is high in the mineral selenium. Selenium has also been used help to
fight cancer. I make it my business to have 5-10 Brazil Nuts a day.
Third on my list is Almonds. I have loved them for years. What
would the world be like without Almonds or Almond Joys? (LOL).
Almond Joys... man, what an evil snack. There is a lot to be said about
Almonds. They are one of the most widely used nuts in the world. They
taste great, easy to fine, great for fighting hunger pains, and provide
several health benefits.

4

Almonds are low in saturated fat, offers an excellent source of
vitamin E, calcium, and Iron. Health experts also recommend Almonds
for fighting heart disease and cancer. There are other nut choices that
also off good health benefits; however, the three discussed are in my
opinion, the best for overall health.
You may use the following omega oils to prepare or compliment
food: canola, safflower, olive, and are the most popular. All three help
fight bad cholesterol. When I want a quick nutritious meal, I choose one
out of the three for stir-frying.

5

Calorie Guide

6

7

8

The Three Body Types
Now that we have established a good nutritional guideline, let us
discuss the three different body types or chemical structures and how
their nutritional needs differ.
The three body types are the Mesomorph, the Ectomorph, and
the Endomorph. The most athletic of the three is the Mesomorph.
Those with this body type have a fast metabolism. They are naturally
muscular with broad shoulders and usually a small waist. They have the
genetic advantage of being able to put on muscle within a short period.
The Mesomorph needs plenty of complex carbohydrates in his
diet to offset the way his system continuously burns calories. For this
particular type of chemical structure, I also advise the use of eggs,
complex carbs, and fats (omegas) in the diet to keep calories in longer.
Good examples of the Mesomorphic body type are the immortal Steve
Reeves, Sergio “The Myth” Olivia, Arnold “Conan” Schwarzenegger,
Lou “The Hulk” Ferrigno, and last but not least, yours truly.
The Ectomorph is very similar to the Mesomorph in several
ways. This body type also has a fast metabolism, in fact, extremely fast.
This person can eat virtually anything and get away with it; however, if
this person intends to put on quality muscle, he must use foods of the
highest nutritional value. Yet, there are advantages and disadvantages to
being an Ectomorph. The advantages are: (1) there is little chance of
ever becoming fat; and (2) there is joy in knowing those crazy low
calorie diets will never be necessary. The disadvantage is that each
pound for the Ectomorph is a struggle. Yet he can rest assured that each
pound will be quality, provided his diet consists of high quality foods.
Though his diet should be similar to that of the Mesomorph, he can use a
higher amount of fat; however, he should not let fat exceed fifteen
percent of his total caloric intake. After arranging the proper diet for the
Ectomorph, the word “ripped” becomes his. Such was the trademark of
Frank Zane (the “Master of Illusion”), who successfully won the Mr.
Olympia three time.

9

On the other side of the spectrum is the Endomorph, who is
quite different in the way his body burns calories. The Endomorph,
having a slow metabolism and possessing a naturally high amount of
body fat, must be careful in his choice of foods. The Endomorph must
rely on low calorie foods quickly used by the body. His proteins should
come from foods such as chicken, turkey, fish, free form amino acids and
three or more whole eggs a day.
The major portion of the Endomorph’s diet should come from
low calorie carbohydrates and plenty of green vegetables. The
Endomorph may use complex carbohydrates in his caloric intake in very
small portions and only during the early part of the day. By having a
happy medium of the three food types, he should be able to make
tremendous gains in muscle and lose fat at the same time. A good diet,
the proper training, and a little aerobic activity (bicycling, speed walking,
swimming) can help speed up the metabolism.
The best living example of the Endomorph is Dave Draper (the
“Blond Bomber”). By having the proper nutrition and training, he has
been able to rise above the cards that nature dealt.
When it comes to their caloric needs of the individual body types, they
differ just as much as their physical characteristics do.
Beginning with the Mesomorph, I recommend a caloric base of 10-12
calories per pound of body weight. For the Ectomorph I recommend 1517 calories per pound of body weight. For the Endomorph I recommend
6 calories per pound of body weight. Example: A person weighting 200
lbs (Mesomorph) needs approximately 2000 (200lb x 10 cal.) calories for
their basil metabolic rate.
Once established, we must then add additional calories for
weight training. (1 ½ hr vigorous weight training = approximately 1000
calories) We then add that figure to the 2000 (B.M.R) (2,000+1000=
3,000 calories). After establishing this figure, we must then increase the
sum of 3,000 by 500 calories more per day. Why the 500 calorie
increase? The rule used when wanting to put on a pound of muscle is to
increase your calorie intake by 3500 within a week. By adding 500
calories to the daily caloric intake weight gains can be realized. Within 7
days, your weight should have increased by 1lb.

10

The total calorie intake for an individual weighing 200 lbs
(Mesomorph) goes as follow: 2,000 calories (B.M.R), 1,000 Calories for
1 ½ hr weight training (also be mindful that additional physical activity
requires additional calories), 500 additional calories per day for mass
building, 3,500 total calories. Now that we have determined the needs
for the caloric intake, let us use the mass formula for the proper ratio of
protein, carbohydrates, and fat.
At 3,500 calories, the ratio breaks down should be calculated in
the following way: 3,500 x 30% protein = 1,050. Calories/4 grams of
protein = 262 grams of protein. 3,500 x 55% carbohydrates = 1,925.
Calories/4grams of carbohydrates = 481 grams of carbohydrates. 3,500 x
15% fats = 525 = calories/9grams of fat = 58 grams of fat.
The formula simply goes 30% protein, 55-60% carbohydrates, and 1015% fat.
There you have it! A simplified mass building plan with science
and experience to back it up.
Vitamin Supplements
Vitamins are now used for health and physical well-being more
than ever. With the cost of medical insurance and prescription medicine,
people are looking for other alternatives. It does not matter whether you
are a bodybuilder, homemaker, business professional, or an athlete,
supplementation is beneficial and necessary.
A well-rounded nutritional program should begin with a natural
food base multi-vitamin and multi-mineral. Vitamins are essential in
giving the body important nutrients that may be lacking in our daily
nutritional intake. Nutrients that help repair cells, muscle function, aid in
digestion, restore energy, aid in mental clarity, strengthen bones, and
boost the immune system.

11

The following is a list of nutrients used to offer additional health
benefits to age management:
Trans-resveratrol: For fighting heart disease
D-3: Bone health
Ubiquinol: Stamina and recovery
Omega fish oil: For cardio-vascular health
Joint complex (MSM, Glucosamine, Chondroiton, Shark
Cartilage): For Joint health
Multi-mineral: Important for the proper function of every
system in the body.
Sports Vitamin Supplements
Then of course, there are the sports specialty products used for
hard-core training. As an athlete, I rely on sports supplements as a daily
part of my fitness and nutritional regiment. Here is a list of them.
Lee Haney's Nutritional Support System: Carries four great products
that are designed for serious athletes.
Power Grid: Combines protein, carbohydrates, and creatine to help
increase muscle size.
Power Aminos: Formulated to increase Nitric Oxide levels for muscle
growth and recovery.
Competitive Multi-vitamin Pack: Formulated with the serious athlete
in mind. Combines nutrients to help repair cells and enhance overall
physical performance.
Fat Burning Complex: Combines amino acids and herbs to help burn
fat more efficiently.
Advance Whey 26: Create to replenish and repair the muscle cells for
quality growth.
One of the top leaders in producing bodybuilding products is Gaspari
Nutrition. When it comes to research and quality development Gaspari
leads the way. The following is a list of some of Gaspari's top body
building products:

12

Herbal Supplements
Herbs have been around since the beginning of time. They were
our first medicines. There are herbs for nearly every type of sickness or
disease. However, the biggest concern is disease prevention. It would
be nearly impossible to name all the different herbs and their uses:
especially when many of them have several medicinal purposes.
One of the best sources of herbal information is available in a
book called Prescription for Nutritional Healing written by Phyllis A.
Balch, CNC. It has been a tremendous resource to me over the years.
By having knowledge of herbs and how their used, can have a positive
impact on present and long term health.
The most popular use of herbs today has been in systemic
cleansing and detox programs. Detoxing have proven to be a great way
to keep the body energize and refreshed. It helps get rid of stored waste
and bloat which leaves the body tired and sluggish. It also aids in the
health of the internal organs such as the kidney, liver, urinary system,
and cleansing of the blood stream.
The following is a list of herbs that are part of a systemic
cleansing detox program offered through Lee Haney's Nutritional
Support System:

13

Herbal cleansing complex for the Blood, Liver, Kidney, Urinary
system
Milk Thistle (blood cleanser)
Burdock Root
Yellow Dock
Red Clover
Golden Seal

Cranberry Powder Extract
Garlic
Cascara Sagrada
Lemon Extract

Colon cleansing fiber complex
Oat Bran
Bentonite Clay
Glucomannan
African Bird Pepper

Fennel Seed
Senna Leaves
Cape Aloe
Flax Seed Oil

Definition and Weight Distribution
In the following paragraphs, we will deal with the scientific
approach needed to lower body fat and redistribute weight. It has been
common knowledge for a long time that aerobics play a vital part in
keeping the body in shape; however, the question remains: to what
degree does it help or harm? Before determining that, we must first look
at the person and his desired goal. The bodybuilder should have two
expectations: cardiovascular conditioning and keeping body fat down.
When setting up a good aerobic program, I would include speed walking,
treadmill, or the elliptical each day after training. The amount of time
needed for these exercises depends upon the individual.
To get rid of body fat, I suggest at least 30 minutes of cycling or
speed walking seven days a week. This will enable you to burn at least
seventeen hundred calories in aerobic activity. This will help eliminate
one-half pound of body fat per week.
Using aerobics in your training will help you lower fat while
maintaining muscle. The aerobics also will enable you to maintain a
substantial caloric intake while losing fat, provided your body fat is not
way out of control. If such is the case and you are a competitive
bodybuilder, start your contest preparation well in advance. Should the

14

body fat be around 15%, begin your diet and aerobics sixteen weeks
away from the show. It takes at least 3,500 calories to make up one
pound of fat. Weight reduction can be achieved by lowering caloric
intake by 500 a day or by incorporating one hour of aerobics in your
training each day. I suggest a 55-split between additional aerobic
activity and reduced caloric consumption, which would entail a half-hour
of aerobics and a drop of 250 in caloric intake. By doing so, a
redistributing phase will take place right before your eyes.
Below is a sample chart of figures to determine your caloric
intake and activity requirements for fat lose.
CHART FOR FAT LOST AND REDISTRIBUTION
Male
Resisting Metabolic
Rate
1 hr. Weight Training
Caloric Reduction
Needed
Additional Aerobics
Activity
--1/2 hr. Bicycling

Meso-Ecto
2500

Endo
1500

500
250

250-300
250

250

250

In this Meso-Ecto Category, we can use the figure of 2,500
calories for the resting metabolic rate and 500 calories needed for a onehour weight-training workout, which gives us a total of 3,000 calories for
maintenance. You must subtract 250 from that figure and then make
your choice of an aerobic exercise that will allow you to burn 250
calories in a half-hour session.
The caloric reduction and the aerobic activity yield a total of 500
calories eliminated. In seven days, this caloric reduction equals 3,500
calories or one pound of body fat. Keep in mind that these figures can
vary depending upon the individual and his daily agenda. I recommend
that you not depend solely upon written figures or estimates. It is very
important to allow your natural bodily instincts to play a role in having
the final say. For example, if your caloric intake begins to leave you

15

without strength or energy, you must respond regardless of figures
written in a book. Do not disregard your natural instinct and falls prey to
numbers!
Pre-contest Carbohydrate Loading and Depletion
This marks the final phase of nutrition’s part in contest
preparation. It is normally during this phase that most bodybuilders
encounter problems. The depletion and reloading phase can be your best
friend when done properly or a dangerous enemy if done incorrectly. I
have known athletes to die from the lack of knowledge when depleting.
So why do it? When done properly it helps bring out
dimensions in definition that can give an athlete an edge.
The depletion phase is done by lowering carbohydrate and water
intake, which causes the muscle cells to shrink giving the body a flat
appearance. During this time, the body will lack energy and reacts as
though it has been given a diuretic. This helps the athlete get rid of water
being stored. There will also be a noticeable drop in body weight of
approximately five pounds or more.
Before going into the depleting and reloading phase, be sure to
have a ledger handy to monitor your caloric intake and weight.
Suggestions have been made that the carbohydrate and fluid intake be
lowered at least six days before the contest. Most bodybuilding
competitions are on Saturdays, which means that the depletion date
should begin Monday, and stretch onward into Wednesday. I advise
never going lower than 60g of carbohydrates and three glasses of water a
day. To go below these amounts could be dangerous. These amounts
can and will vary depending upon the size of the person. Take for
instance, Ronnie Coleman, who stands 5 ft-9 inches tall and weighs
between 270-280 lbs. for competition, Sixty grams of carbohydrates and
three glasses of water or six cups of hot tea a day may throw his system
off and may cause mental disorientation and possible damage to the
kidneys and liver. It is also important to take a multi-mineral complex
during the depleting phase to avoid becoming dehydrated and cramps.

16

When lowering your carbohydrate intake, replace it with an
equal amount of calories using protein and fat (50/50). The proteins
should consist of chicken and unsalted tuna (packed in water), and amino
acids. The fats sources should be almonds, Brazil Nuts, sunflower seeds
(all nuts should be unsalted), omega oils, and egg yolks.
As the diet changes, so must your training. Starting Monday (the
first day of carbohydrate depletion), I advise that you increase your
normal number of repetitions by three to five for each body part and
lower the weight by 20-30%. Be sure to follow your regular workout
sequence through Wednesday. This will allow you to deplete the muscle
completely.
On the morning of the fourth day, carbohydrate loading should
begin. Then you should remove the increased percentages of protein and
fats from the diet and put back the carbohydrates. I advise maintaining
the similar balance used in the diet before going into the depletion phase.
Example: If you used 300g of carbohydrates to fill out the muscle before
depleting, 300g should used before to reload.
When reloading, I recommend taking in at least 40-50g of
carbohydrates every two hours; however, this figure may vary depending
upon the size and gender of the individual.
The type of carbohydrates used should consist mostly of
complexes such as hot cereals (oatmeal w/ brown sugar), rice, sweet
baked potatoes, and pasta along with carbohydrates such as apples and
bananas. There are no dried fruits or fruit juices allowed. The amount of
protein needed may vary. I recommend at least 75 to 100 grams during
the loading phase because the muscles are not being trained.
As the carbohydrates are increased, the muscle cells will slowly start to
expand causing you to take on a full outward appearance. Your fluid
intake should remain the same during the first three days of the depletion
phase.
During the last two to three days prior to reloading (depending
upon your individual size), the muscle cells will receive fluid by way of
the carbohydrates being used for reloading. This is the reason; the
amount of drinking water should be limited to avoid a spillover between

17

the muscle and skin that causes a smooth appearance. Two to three days
leading up to the contest, I suggest once again, using five to six cups of
hot tea (English) and B-6 (100mg) as a natural diuretic.
Another preparation tool I recommend to help eliminate the last
bit of water is wearing a sauna suite while training (inside facilities only)
one and a half weeks before the contest.
Note: Do not use the sauna suite during the reloading phase.These two
procedures will allow a competitor to continue to drink and flush at the
same time.
Note: During the reloading phase, the athlete is to focus only on taking
care of final preparation items such as posing and tanning. There should
be no training during this time. The muscles must reload during this
time.
By the sixth day (competition day), every muscle should be
completely loaded with glycogen and vascularity should be clear. Be
sure not to panic during those very critical phases by taking prescription
diuretics and laxatives. It is during this time some bodybuilders freak
out and waste a whole year of hard training.
Note: I advise practicing carbohydrate depletion and reloading in the
off-season so that you will have a realistic idea of what is required to be
ready on the day of the contest. This is important because it takes some
athletes 24-72 hours to reload. Yet, you cannot flex what you cannot see.
So keep the body fat under control at all times!
This concludes the Ultimate Bodybuilding Nutritional Guide.

18

Ultimate Bodybuilding Training Guide
Before getting into the nuts and bolts of building muscle let me,
first take time to give honor to two of the most influential pioneers in the
Sport of Bodybuilding. They are Joe and Ben (the late) Weider. Their
work and dedication to the growth of bodybuilding have had an impact
throughout the entire world of health and fitness. The Weider brothers
gave international birth to bodybuilding legends like Arnold
Swartzzenneggar, Larry Scott, Sergio Olivia, Chris Dickerson, Franco
Columbo, Frank Zane, Samir Bionuet, Dorian Yates, Ronnie Coleman,
Jay Cutler, Dexter Jackson, and yours truly, Lee Haney, to name a few.
The Weider brothers were able to establish organizational ties to
countries all over the world to create what is now the International
Federation of Bodybuilding (IFBB).
Today, the IFBB consist of more than180 international affiliates
worldwide. We give thanks to Joe and (the late) Ben Weider.
Then there's, my dear friend and President of the National
Physique Committee (NPC), Jim Manion. The NPC began hosting its
first national bodybuilding competitions in 1982. Yours truly (Lee
Haney) was the first NPC Jr. and National Champion in 1982. The NPC
ushered in a new and exciting era in bodybuilding. It is by way of the
NPC that bodybuilders are elevated from armature status to the
professional ranks in the IFBB.
With Jim Manion as its President, the NPC has continue to
experience incredible growth and respect for being one of the best
armature bodybuilding organization in the world.
All thanks go to Mr. James Manion
Note: Students of the Iron Games should have knowledge of its
history
The workout programs that follow are those used personally by
me and other champions over the years. If you follow them, I can assure
you of great results; however, „to thine own self be true.' Bodybuilding
is a sport that allows a person to challenge his or her personal best on a
daily bases. Whether the challenge is to gain weight, lose weight, or to
add an extra inch here or there-there is no end to the quest for the perfect

19

body! If you are just getting started, I strongly advise using the
following foundational muscle-building program. Having the proper
foundation in anything you do is of utmost importance.
Over the years, I have corrected hundreds of bodybuilders in the
sport that lacked foundational muscle building exercises as a constant in
their workouts. For example, using cable crossovers to add size to his
chest or using seated leg extensions in hope of adding overall mass to the
legs cannot and will never be able to duplicate foundational size
developed through the bench press and the incline press. Nor will leg
extensions replace or add foundational mass to the legs like squats will.
So in short, do not try to re-invent the wheel! Always keep the
foundational muscle building exercises present at all times in your
workouts.
clarity:

Let‟s do a body part and mass building exercise run down for

Chest: Bench press
Bicep: Barbell or dumbbell curl
Back: Bent barbell row
Shoulders: Military press (standing for core and stabilization muscles)
Triceps: One-arm dumbbell extensions (I advise press downs to warm
the elbows)
Legs: Squats (overall leg development)
Calves: Standing toe raise
Note: If the goal is to develop a solid physique, these seven exercises
must always be a part of your regular training program. These are the
same exercises used in the world of power lifting for developing strength
and size. It is my personal belief and experience that in order to become
a good or great bodybuilder, you must incorporate the foundational
training principles used in power lifting, which is low reps and heavy
weight.

20

Training Systems
Before we get started, we will begin by first laying the ground rules:
1. Combine the push/pull or pull/ push muscle group together, such
as chest (push) and biceps (pull). This will ease joint and tendon
stress;
2. It does not matter what you have read in the past; always
pyramid your sets. This means to start with a lighter weight and
increase the weight as the muscles become warmer;
3. For developing quality mass, I recommend your reps range
between 6-10 reps. It is not the quantity but the quality;
4. On days when your body feel fatigue cut back on the number of
sets and the amount of weight or go home get some rest and
return later or the next day. Not listening to your body could
result in being injured. “Some time you feel like a nut and
some time you don’t;”
5. While training stay focused on the set from start to finish. There
must be a constant link between both the mind and the muscle at
all times. This will help avoid injuries; and,
6. You cannot train like a horse, eat like a bird, and pack on muscle
mass. The body works by the simple rule of “Demand and
Supply”. Also, remember that quality calories produce a quality
body.
We are now ready to move on to the “Three On-Off One” Mass Building
Program workout.
Three On-Off One: This is in my professional opinion the best and most
serious training program ever devised for the world of dedicated
bodybuilding. I first heard of the “Three On- Off One” when I moved to
California (The Mecca of Bodybuilding) in 1983. I noticed several
bodybuilding legends using this particular program. If it was good
enough for them, it was good enough for me.
It has everything needed to help a person become their best. The “Three
On-Off One” allows the athlete to train at an intense level while having
three full days of recovery time between body part workouts. This helps
lower the risk of training injuries.

21

The following is a three on off one training program design to help
develop quality muscle for the beginner.

“THREE ON-OFF ONE” MASS BUILDING
PROGRAM
DAY

BODY PART

MUSCLE
GROUP

EXERCISE

SETS

REPS

Day 1MONDAY

CHEST

Pectoralis

Bench Press

4

8-10

Incline Press
Flies
Curl
Preacher Curl
Concentration
Curl
Press Downs
Lying French
Press
Arm Extensions
Standing Toe
Raise
Seated Toe Raise
Vertical Leg Raise
(Standing)
Seated Leg Raise
(Knees Bent)
Extensions

4
4
4
4
4

8-10
10-12
8-10
8-10
10-12

3-4
4

10-12
8-10

3
5

8-10
15-20

3
4

15-20
15-20

4

20

4

12

Leg Press
Squats**

4
4

10
8-10

Leg Curls
Same As Day One
Same As Day One
Pull Downs

3-4

10-12

4

10-12

One Arm Row
Long Cable Row
Military Press
Lateral Raise

4
4
4
3-4

8
8-10
8-10
10-12

Bent Laterals
Upright Rows

3-4
3-4

8-10
8-10

OFF ONE

CYCLE

ARMS

Biceps

Triceps

Day 2TUESDAY

CALVES

Gastrocnemiu
s

STOMACH

Abdominals

LEGS

Quadriceps
Frontal Thigh
Quadriceps &
Gluteus
Maximus
Ham Strings

Day 3WEDNESDAY

CALVES
STOMACH
BACK

SHOULDERS

Day 4THURSDAY
Day 5-FRIDAY

Abdominals
Latissimus
Dorsi

Deltoids
Lateral
deltoids
Rear deltoids
Trapezius

DAY OF REST
REPEAT

ON THREE

Note: Training days may fall on Sundays. If Sunday is your day of
spiritual refreshing and worship, carry the training day forward by rolling
the three-day cycle over to Monday.

22

Note: On your off day, your caloric intake should reflect a regular
training day. The extra calories will help you increase muscle size.
Six-Day Training System: Use this system when your goal is to lower
body fat, speed up the metabolism, or bring out quality definition. This
program is also great for conditioning the body. When it comes to
adding the finishing touch to your physique, the six-day training system
is perfect. Yet, I advise no more than seven to eight weeks prior to a
bodybuilding contest. The following is the six-day workout program:

23

Six-Day Contest Training System:
DAY

BODY PART

Day 1Monday

CHEST

MUSLCE
GROUP
Pectoralis

UPPER CHEST
TOTAL CHEST
ARMS

Biceps

CALVES
STOMACH

Gastrocnemius
Abdominals
Abdominals

Day 2Tuesday

Day 3Wednesday

LEGS

Quadriceps
Frontal Thigh

ARMS

Quadriceps &
Gluteus Maximus
Ham Strings
Triceps

STOMACH

Abdominals

BACK

Latissimus Dorsi

SHOULDERS

Deltoids

CALVES

Lateral/frontal
deltoids
Trapezius
Gastrocnemius

STOMACH

Abdominals

EXERCISE

SETS

REPS

Bench press or
Dumbbell Press
Incline Bench Press
or Dumbbell Press
Dumbbell Flies
Cable Crossover
Curls
Preacher or incline
curl
Concentration Curls
Standing Toe Raise
Seated Leg
Raise/Knee Bent
Incline Sit-Ups
Crunches
Extensions

4

8-10

4

8-10

4
3-4
4
4

12
15
8-10
8-10

3
5
4

10
15-20

4
3
3-4

15-20
40
15

Leg Press
Squats**

3-4
3-4

12
8-10

Stiff leg Dead Lifts
Press Downs
Tricep Kickbacks
SAME AS
MONDAY
Pull Downs Front

3-4
3-4
3-4

10-12
12-15
12-15

4

12

One Arm Row or
Bent dumbbell row
Long Cable Rows
T-bar row
Military dumbbell
Press
Lateral Raise/front
raise combo
Upright Rows
Standing Toe Raise

3-4

8-10

3-4
3
3-4

8-10
8
8-10

3-4

10-12

3-4
4-5

8-10
15-20

Vertical Leg Raise
Seated Leg
Raise/Knee Bent

3-4
3-4

15-20
20

Note: Repeat cycle Days 4-6 having the seventh day off (Sunday) as a
day of rest.
Note: The 2nd Shoulder workout: add Dumbbell Bent laterals for rear
deltoid muscles 3 sets x 10-12 reps

24

Note: The 2nd Leg workout cycle should consist of the following:
Seated Leg extensions: 3 sets x 15 reps
Hack squats: 3 sets x 12-15 reps
Lunges: 3 sets x 15 reps
Leg Curls: 3 sets x 12 reps
Add 30 minutes on the elliptical or stepper as your second workout in the
evening for extra fat loss.

Note: leg days (no aerobics)
Three-Day Power Circuit: This is a great program to use after a
bodybuilding contest. It gives the body time to repair itself. I like the
fact that each body part has 7 full days to recover. This particular
training program is similar to those used by power lifters. The only
negative is the risk of picking up body fat because of the extended off
days between body parts; however, extra body fat can be less of a
problem by eating quality food and adding aerobic activity on the off
days. This program is great for the joints and muscle repair for
competitive bodybuilders and those who are age 50+.

25

Three Day Power Circuit: Off Season Training
Program
DAY
Day 1MONDAY

BODY
PART
CHEST

ARMS

MUSCLE
GROUP
Pectoralis

Biceps
Triceps

Day 2WEDNESDAY

Day 3-FRIDAY

CALVES

Gastrocnemius

STOMACH

Abdominals

LEGS

CALVES
STOMACH
BACK

SHOULDERS

MONDAY

Quadriceps
Frontal Thigh
Quadriceps &
Gluteus
Maximus
Ham Strings
Abdominals
Latissimus
Dorsi
Deltoids
Lateral deltoids
Rear deltoids
Trapezius

REPEAT
SAME
CYCLE

26

EXERCISE

SET
S

REPS

4

8-10

Incline Press
Flies
Curl
Preacher Curl
Concentration Curl
Press Downs
Lying French Press
Arm Extensions
Standing Toe Raise
Seated Toe Raise
Vertical Leg Raise
(Standing)
Seated Leg Raise
(Knees Bent)
Extensions

4
4
4
4
4
3-4
4
3
5
3
4

8-10
10-12
8-10
8-10
10-12
10-12
8-10
8-10
15-20
15-20
15-20

4

20

4

12

Leg Press
Squats**

4
4

10
8-10

Leg Curls
Same As Day One
Same As Day One
Pull Downs

3-4

10-12

4

10-12

One Arm Row
Long Cable Row
Military Press
Lateral Raise
Bent Laterals
Upright Rows

4
4
4
3-4
3-4
3-4

8
8-10
8-10
10-12
8-10
8-10

Bench Press

The following anatomy chart describes a front and back view of the
various muscle groups.

27
27

28

How much weight should you use? You be the judge. The goal is to
training to stimulate not annihilate. If your last two sets become a
struggle at the end of the last two reps you are good. If the weight is a
struggle during the first set, you need to lighten the load. Be sure that the
physical demand is within reason.
Recovery time between sets should take no more than 45-60 seconds,
which gives your training partner enough time to complete their set. Leg
training may need additional time between sets for recovery.
Should you wear knee straps or belts? I recommend you use both
when starting to max out while lifting. Both pieces of equipment lifting
belt and knee wraps create a protective barrier for both the tendons and
ligaments. They allow you to lift heavier weight while protecting the
joints.
Note: There are no cable exercises such as cable crossover, cable curls or
cable laterals mentioned at this level of training. The primary focus must
be to develop the muscle foundation first and far most. After a solid
muscle foundation is developed, you may then add cable exercises for
the finishing touch.
Note: Each training day should consist of the pairing of muscle groups
that involve pushing and pulling exercises.
Example: Day 1. Chest (push), Bicep (pull), Tricep (push)
This helps prevent additional wear on the tendons and ligaments while
training.
Note: The leg routines shown with each of the workout programs use the
pre-exhaust principle. What does pre-exhaust mean? Simply put, it
means to fatigue the muscles with secondary exercises such as leg
extension and leg press before doing the squat, which is the number 1
mass building exercise for the legs.
By having the squat as the third exercise in the sequence instead of the
first one, a 200 lbs. squat feels like 300 lbs. The signal sent to the leg is
that the weight feels heavy. Because the weight “feels heavy,” the
muscle will respond to the demand to produce more size to endure the
workload. The pre-exhaust stimulates muscle growth while not having

29

to use as much weight to get results. This will keep the back, hips, and
knees healthier in the years to come. I can attest to having no knee, back,
or hip problems after a long career of competitive battles.
Be sure to follow the mass building nutritional program that was
created to help maximize your gains.
“NO PAIN, NO GAIN, AND REMAIN THE SAME”
Special note: I strongly recommend the Competitive Mass series
products to help enhance your results (athletes age 18+). I also
recommend getting the Lee Haney Workout DVD. It is the
perfect educational tool for hard-core training with valuable tips
and inspiration-a must have for serious training and is available
at our online store (www.leehaney.com)

Training Principles
The following will help clarify some of the language and terminology
associated with bodybuilding:
1) Push Pull
When you want to incorporate, pressing movement with a
pulling movements use this principle. An example would be
chest (push) and biceps (pull). This approach reduces the risk of
strains and joint soreness.
2) Pyramid
In this principle, you gradually increase in weight. My
recommendation is that as you decrease the number of
repetitions for both size and strength as you increase the weight.

30

EXAMPLE:
REPETITIONS

WEIGHT

12 reps w/

50 lbs.

10 reps w/

60 lbs.

8 reps w/

70 lbs.

6 reps w/

80 lbs.

4 reps w/

90 lbs.

I recommend never going lower than six reps for
bodybuilding purposes
3) Super Sets
This principle is great when you want to bring out more
muscularity or to shock the muscle in order to stimulate extra
growth. In it, you alternate one exercise or body part with
another.
4) Split
This principle involves the separation of the muscle groups or
time intervals used to train them.
EXAMPLE:
Monday morning – Bicep/calves
Monday evening – Chest/abs
It allows you to give an all out effort to train each body part.
Being able to separate the muscle groups will allow the cells to
replenish themselves for the next workout section.
5) Priority Principle
This principle means exactly what it says, “Priority.” When you
want to stimulate growth in a particular body part or muscle
group the priority principle is used. When there is a muscle
lagging behind, you must give it extra attention by training it
first or doing additional work.

31

6) Isotension
Joe Weider‟s Pet Pea, Isotension, is as real as the “Master
Blaster” himself. When training the muscle, there must be an all
our effort made to link the mind with it. By doing so, your will
be able to squeeze out every ounce of growth and definition
during each repetition.
7) Forced Reps
This procedure is great when you want to push a muscle to the
limit. The term “forced rep” is when someone has to assist you
toward your desired number of repetitions because your muscles
are exhausted. I recommend doing at least three to four forced
reps at the end of the last two sets of each exercise. When doing
forced reps make sure you are physically in control of every
repetition. Once the link of mind and muscle has broken, stop,
or face the danger of an injury.
These seven principles are important in realizing your overall growth as
a bodybuilder.

Weight Training Exercises and Function
Chest
1. Bench Press (barbell or dumbbell): The best exercise for developing
the foundation for mass for the entire chest
2. Incline Press (barbell or dumbbell): Good for the upper chest
foundation and the lateral deltoid/upper chest tie-in
3. Incline Dumbbell Fly: Great as a polishing movement for the upper
chest.
4. Dumbbell fly: Used to add quality and shape, great as a finishing
exercise when preparing the last eight weeks before a contest
5. Dips: Great for developing the lower chest, mid and upper

32

6. Cable Crossover: Great for polishing the lower chest; use as a
finishing exercise for contest preparation NOTE: Do not use it as a
foundation movement.

Abdominals (abs)
1. Seated Leg Raise: Great exercise for hitting the abs between sets.
When done proper they work the lower, upper, and side oblique
abdominal areas.
2. Incline Sit Up: Another tested and tried movement that has stood the
test of time. Adds quality with just enough extra muscle needed to awe
spectators NOTE: I do not advise using weight with inclines. It
causes unwanted thickness around the oblique area.
3. Vertical Leg Raise: If I had to choose one exercise for training the
abdominal area, this would be it! It hits every section of the abdominal
area. This exercise may be a little tough for beginners. It is a physically
taxing exercise and the results speak for themselves.
4. Side Twist (w/broom handle): This is a good exercise for focusing on
the oblique area. It also adds flexibility in the waist and lower back
areas. I personally use it for adding that extra dimension of definition to
the abs and keeping me loose when executing transition poses (turning
from side to side).
5. Crunches: This is one of the most used exercises to date. It is one that
bodybuilders and the general public love. Crunches do not cause stress
to the lower back like other exercises and no equipment is needed. This
is another exercise I like doing between sets.
6. Standing Leg Raise: This is a combination abdominal/cardio
exercise. This is one I use and recommend for Functional Training. It
works the abs while also strengthening the stabilizing muscles in the hips
and lower back.

Back
1. Pull Downs (front): Great for adding width and quality to the upper
back, helps to widen and elongate lat muscles.

33

2. Chin Ups (front): Adds width and thickness to laterals.
3. Barbell Row: This exercise is #1 for adding thickness to the entire
back.
4. One Arm Dumbbell Row: Helps isolate and shape individual back
muscles. Generally used more often than barbell rows as contest times
nears (eight weeks out).
5. Cable Row: This exercise is an excellent movement for shaping and
adding length to the laterals. Also great for bring in that quality look of
shape and quality.
6. Hyper Extensions (lower back): Great for adding thickness to the
lower back.
7. Stiff Leg Dead Lifts: “Kills two birds with one stone” by working the
lower back and the hamstrings (thigh biceps) at the same time.
8. T-Bar Row: Besides Barbell Row, nothing compares to the T-Bar
Row. It is the perfect exercise for adding overall mass, thickness, and
width to the back.

Shoulders
1. Standing Military Press (Barbell or Dumbbell): The #1 exercise for
overall development of the shoulders. It is the foundational exercise for
shoulders. I prefer standing presses instead of seated because it involve
balance and stabilization.
2. Lateral Raise: Adds quality to the lateral deltoid muscles. Best
results when using dumbbells for foundational development. Cables
laterals can be used seven to eight weeks before competition. Split sets
between dumbbells and cables (two to three sets using each exercise)
when seven to eight weeks prior to a competition.
3. Bent Lateral Raises: This exercise is perfect movement for training
the rear deltoid muscles. For best results use dumbbells instead of cables
for foundational development.

34

4. Up Right Row (front): This is an excellent finishing movement for
working the traps, frontal deltoids, and the lateral deltoids.
5. Rear Upright Rows: This is the absolute best movement for being
able to hit the traps directly. It is the movement for trap mass.

Biceps
1. Barbell or Standing Dumbbell Curl: When it comes to adding mass
to the biceps, it is #1! There is NO substitute!!
2. Standing Alternate Dumbbell Curl: This is a great exercise for
building bicep mass while also adding separation between the bicep and
tricep tie in.
3. Preacher Curl or Scott Curl (named after Larry Scott the first Mr.
Olympia): Helps add length to the bicep while also adding to the peak.
4. Concentration Curl: This is a perfect exercise for adding size to the
head of the bicep. This exercise should always be a part of bicep
training.
5. Hammer Curl: This exercise that works a combination of bicep and
forearms. Not my favorite but it helps as an alternative when dealing
with bicep tendinitis.

Triceps
1. Press Down: Great for adding size and quality to the triceps. I also
advise having press downs as a warm up movement when training
triceps.
2. French Press: Lying or standing w/easy curl bar is an excellent mass
building exercise. Be careful not to snap lock the elbows when
extending the triceps.
3. Dumbbell Extension (one arm): This is an excellent exercise for
developing the foundation of the triceps. I started with one-arm
extensions at age 12.

35

4. Reverse Tricep Cable Extensions: This exercise is excellent when
you are seven to eight weeks out from a competition. It is the perfect
finishing exercise to complete the tricep workout. I advise 3 sets x 12
reps. Squeeze-squeeze, flex!
5. Tricep Kickbacks: This is a great exercise for the training the entire
triceps. You can substitute it for the one arm extension as a changeup.

Legs (Frontal Thighs/Quads)
1. Leg Extension: This exercise is perfect for adding size and separation
to the frontal thigh muscles. It should also lead the way to begin a leg
workout. Leg extensions prepare the legs for the heavier movements to
follow.
2. Leg Press: This is great for adding size and quality to the overall leg.
It allows the use of heavy weight without over stressing the muscles in
the back.
3. Squats: This exercise is the king of leg mass. There can be no
substitute. This exercise demands all or nothing. Not half squats but the
whole deal. Notice, in the sequence of leg exercises I have squats listed
third. I did this because I advise using the Pre-exhaust principal. By
doing squats third, you save your back and knees and still pack on plenty
of leg mass.
4. Hack Squats: The very best when it comes to adding quality and
separation to the frontal thigh muscles. These are great as an every other
workout movement in the off-season; however, must be a regular part of
the workout at least 8-10 weeks out from a competition.
5. Front Squats: Ads size and separation to the frontal thighs.
Especially the teardrop muscles at the base of the quads. This exercise
works similar to hacks. I advise alternation them with hacks from time
to time.
6. Lunges: Lunges are great for adding separation and quality to the
frontal thighs and glutes. Off-season I advise using them every third
workout.

36

Hamstrings or Leg Biceps
1. Leg Curl: Here is the perfect exercise for adding size, quality, and
length to the leg biceps. They should also be first when training
hamstrings.
2. Stiff Leg Dead Lifts: The best exercise for adding mass and length to
the thigh bicep. For this exercise, you may use either the barbell or
dumbbells. Stiff legs are hit the lower back (lumbar) muscles as well. It
is my favorite.

Calves
1. Standing Toe Raise: Bread and butter for adding size to the calve
muscles. This is the number 1 exercise for developing calves. There is
several calve machines that now imitate standing toe raises while
yielding great results.
2. Seated Toe Raise: This is a great exercise for adding quality and
separation to the calve muscles. Not as hard-core as standing toe raise,
but bring the finishing lines to competition ready calves.

The Art of Posing
With the basic formats of nutrition and training behind us, it is
now time to take our show on the road. One of the most vital phases in
preparing for a contest is your posing presentation. Most bodybuilders
take this phase too lightly. Several things are involved in making up the
proper presentation such as the posing routine, choice of music, and the
appeal of your cosmetics, briefs, tan, hair, etc. Any of these elements left
unattended can make or break you as a competitive bodybuilder.
In putting together the ultimate posing routine, you must take
into consideration the physique, structure, and the personality of the
individual. By doing so, you will be able to make good choices in all
areas. Your posing routine should consist of poses that will show you at
an advantage. It would be advantageous to study some of the poses used
by the Olympians; notice the similarities of their body structures and
your own.

37

During my early years as a competitor, I studied the physiques
and poses of Arnold Schwarzenegger and Robby Robinson (“The Black
Prince”). I had a similar frame like these great Olympians, but at the
time, mine was a much smaller version. Now that I have reached a more
mature size and height, I have been able to perfect the poses along with
my stage personality.
After you choose your choices of poses, you must then put them
in a good workable order. It is a general rule never to start a posing
routine with your back to the audience or your glutes turned up in
the judge’s face. Always start your routine with a nice frontal pose as
an introduction. After doing at least three to four good frontal poses,
move to the side, the rear, and again to the front to finish your routine.
During the beginner‟s phase of competition, you should use a rotation
sequence when setting up your routine.
Be sure not to bore your audience with an overextended stage
presence! I recommend that the beginner and intermediate have 12-15
poses in their routine. After having a little more experience under your
belts, you will be able to create and add to your posing routines.
Once you have chosen the poses for your routine, you must then select
the proper music.
When choosing posing music, you must first make sure that it
fits your personality and routine. For example, it would not be wise for a
bodybuilder with a massively rugged physique to use extremely soft
music. His choice should be something that expresses power. On the
other hand, a bodybuilder with a small, but symmetrical build should not
use music that could overpower his physique. When making your
choice, I advise you stick with the top release of the year. This will
allow for more audience participation. There are musical selections that
seem to last forever, such as “Rocky,” or “Eye of the Tiger.” It generally
takes at least four to six weeks to perfect and coordinate a good posing
routine to music.
After setting up a posing routine, you should turn your attention
to the cosmetics portion of the preparation. Believe it or not, your
outward appearance plays a greater role than the posing routine itself.
Should there be any overwhelming distractions such as oversize posing
trunks, extremely pale skin color, or major skin irritations, the judges
may not be able to appreciate the physique in its entirety. When

38

choosing a posing brief or a bikini for females, be sure to choose one that
fits your particular waist, breast, or hip structure. There must be a
correlation between your skin tone and the color of your chosen briefs.
When making your choice be sure that the majority of your tanning
preparations are complete. When tanning, take caution so that you will
avoid unwanted burn patches.
Your makeup and hair grooming are totally up to you. I can only
advise remaining with the correct trend and within the norm. Just as long
as your hair is not purple and your makeup does not exceed that worn by
Dracula, you will be fine!

Sportsmanship
Before going on stage, you must first think about stage presence
and sportsmanship. Where does stage presence and sportsmanship come
into play? Can they make a difference? All the Olympians echo my
answer. The way the judges see you for the first time can make a
difference. Achieving stage presence takes time, lots of practice, and
always looked upon favorably by the judges.
The judges treat sportsmanship as the single most important
factor in determining the overall longevity of an athlete. The President
of the National Physique Committee (N.P.C.), Jim Manion, and the
various members who make up the governing body of the athletes, have
set forth penalties for body builders who do not conduct themselves in an
orderly manner onstage. Guidelines have been set up for all amateur
athletes belonging to the N.P.C. and good sportsmanship is number one.
You must be in control of your emotions at all times, especially
when the judges‟ decisions are announced. It is normally during this
time that emotions run rampant and tempers flare. Whether first, second,
third or last, always take the results with your chin up and remember,
“The warrior that turns and walks away lives to fight another day”.

39

Safety Checklist
As a trainer, you are responsible for the well-being of your clients. The
following is a checklist to help maintain a safe and healthy fitness
environment.
1. Have all clients to fill out a health questionnaire. This is important in
being aware of any current or past injuries.
2. Have clients sign a statement saying that their healthcare provider has
approved physical exercise.
3. Ask questions before getting started such as: What time was your last
meal and what did you have? How are you feeling today?
Please note: It is important to have food in the system 1.5 hours
prior to a workout. The meal must include at least 30 to 40 grams of
carbohydrates for energy.
4. You should be sure to have cool water present for clients at all time. It
should not be iced water!
5. Warm up gradually by walking, using the treadmill, or cycling. Also,
follow through with a slight stretching agenda as part of the warm up.
6. Always, begin with lightweights for the first set of exercises.
Remember, "Train to stimulate, not annihilate.”
7. If the client gets dizzy or light headed while training, stop
immediately. Having the client sit and administer cool water. Keep a
watchful eye of their body language. You may need to call for
emergency care. If so, call an ambulance without hesitation.
8. Keep a cell phone available at all times for emergencies. Have 911 in
your speed dial for emergency needs.

40

Special Message from the I.A.F.S. Founder,
Lee Haney, Eight-Time Mr. Olympia:
It is my sincere hope that with this certification you have gained
insight into knowledge you can use to help people meet their fitness
goals. As you know, there are books and fitness philosophies written all
the time. What you have learned in the I.A.F.S. certification program
has given you proven on the job experience-not some fly by night
philosophy put together by some fly by night philosopher!
I urge you to use that which you have learn to impact the lives of
people in a life giving way. Be passionate about serving others and
always give more than what is required of your time and efforts.
I leave you with this final quote: "What you are is God's gift to
you. What you do with yourself is your gift to God.” ~Leo Buscaglia

41

WARNING
Any exercise or fitness program entails some element of risk. Prior to beginning
any diet or exercise program, it is essential that one consult a doctor to make
sure that no medical condition exists that might prevent one from participating.
It is also vital that one observe proper form when performing any
exercise described in these materials. Failing to do so is very likely to result in
serious injury. When performing any exercise, use a weight that can be
comfortably handled. It is not necessary to use heavy weight to become fit.
Take breaks in your routine when necessary to prevent excess fatigue
and have water on hand to prevent dehydration. By all means, stop exercising at
once if you feel faint, light headed or experience any pain. Pain is not a part of
any proper fitness regimen and is a sign of impending injury or worse.
Personal trainers must observe their clients on a continuing basis to
make sure that they avoid over exertion and are exercising properly.
The information contained in these study materials is not intended to be a
substitute for common sense. One must be aware of their abilities as well as
their nutritional needs. Continued study is necessary for a complete
understanding of the effects of exercise and diet on the human body as well as
the role played by proper nutrition and dietary supplements.

Direct all correspondence, permissions requests, and inquiries to:
International Association of Fitness Sciences
P.O. Box 142489 Fayetteville, GA
1-888-611-4237(IAFS)
www.iafscertification.com

42

